- We’re going to talk a little bit about the transnational aspects of gangs.
- Some of what's happened in LA historically.
- And Ron Noblet is going to help walk us through it.
- He's one of the revered experts on gangs.
- I was originally introduced to him.
- He was referred to as the godfather of gang intervention
- and he's definitely lived up to that title.
- But Ron, you're always interested in some really interesting things.
- Tell me a little bit about what's happening in LA with gangs,
- with groups, with cliques.
- How are things settling out?
- Where's the power?
- And what do we really need to be thinking about
- from the perspective of criminal justice
- when we study that at here in LA?
- Ron Noblet: Good question.
- I think LA is in a holding pattern right now
- in a number of ways.
- The city seems to be,
- this is from my point of view,
- the city seems to be frozen in a state of inactivity
- at the mayoral level,
- at the councilmanic level,
- at the GRYD level.
- There's a lot of talk about stuff going on behind the scenes,
- but not really.
- A change that I see directly that deals with intervention and the dealing with gang members.
- And I've seen this in other areas.
- Once the intervention helped police to lower the level of violence to a certain point,
- the people in control started seeing or acknowledging
- that the people who are capable of lowering the level of violence
- are not nice people to deal with in City Hall.
- And they don’t dress nice and they don't talk nice.
- And so I see more and more encouraging the hiring of more acceptable types of people
- who are truly less capable of dealing with violence.
- And I don't see another open mindedness
- of hiring hardcore guys until there is a true spike in violence.
- But overall, the level of violence in LA is down
- to historical low levels in the 50s.
- With some minor spikes in the Vermont corridor
- and and a lot of uncounted violence going on in East LA.
- Bradley Thomas Rowe: What’s happening in East LA?
- Oh and can you also just explain what GRYD is?
- Ron Noblet: Gang Reduction Youth see GRYD, Gang Reduction Youth...
- Bradley Thomas Rowe: Development.
- Ron Noblet: Development.
- It's in the it's in the mayor's office.
- It’s an independent,
- not an independent,
- but it's a separate group that was put together in 2008
- but with some pressure from a woman by the name of Connie Rice,
- working with the then mayor, Villaraigosa.
- And this the GRYD is a unit which monies from the city go through here
- to particular areas
- that have been measured as having high violence
- rather than unequal amount going to every single one of the fifteen councilmanic districts.
- There's more.
- It helps to have it more specific.
- That's basically GRYD.
- They also do some measurements.
- They also do some training.
- Bradley Thomas Rowe: All right.
- And tell tell me about what’s what's happening in the city
- with the things that we care about with violence,
- intimidation, some other things like that.
- You're saying we're at historic lows,
- but there are some areas that are still of concern in the city.
- Ron Noblet: That will happen as long as we have the inequitablities of poverty,
- of poor schools, of police that have not quite got the idea
- that you don’t brutalize people and people are not animals.
- But those are long term tasks to work on.
- What's happening within the violence world is a breakdown
- of the historical gangs that are based on geographic lights.
- That was more so Mexican
- or Mexican American or Chicano than it was with black.
- Blacks historically have had to move out of their neighborhoods
- more often than not,
- because they weren't really allowed to have their own geographic areas.
- So in that breakdown of fighting for turf
- there has been for a number of reasons
- : One is the use of the Iphone
- and another is the is the increased ability to move over long over long distances instantly.
- The historic large gangs that fight each other
- are now being broken down into cliques
- and more specified types of groups.
- For instance, you'll see groups that are based on get together just to burglarize.
- Other groups just to do arm robberies.
- Other groups deal with sheer drugs.
- Bradley Thomas Rowe: Between between gangs or between cliques?
- Ron Noblet: Internalized in the gangs.
- And in some places, you see guys reaching across their own gang to another gang member
- and they'll get together to do a particular crime.
- And then they'll go and then they'll split
- after it's over and go back to their their own turfs.
- You see that a lot across the nation now more and more.
- As the leaderships are taken out,
- there's a breakdown to the next level.
- And the more the leadership is taken out,
- the more chaos reigns.
- This same type of wrongheaded thinking
- has been taking place in the Middle East
- for years and you could see how effective that is.
- Bradley Thomas Rowe: Right.
- Ron Noblet: Cutting the head off only increases the level of violence.
- You also see it with the cartels in Mexico.
- Cutting their head off increases the level of violence,
- increases the number of individuals fighting for power and fighting for control
- of the drug trade or the gun trade or the slave trade.
- Whatever we call it.
- And I prefer slave trade to this human trafficking stuff because it's basically slavery.
- Bradley Thomas Rowe: Right?
- Yeah.
- Now that's really interesting.
- You brought up some of these different areas that are experiencing similar trends
- and something you and I have talked a little bit about
- and started to sort of try to make some connections
- with is this idea of the correlation between repression or brutal repression and radicalization of youth.
- We talked about it in Egypt with the sort of recruiting of ISIS that's happening in the prisons there.
- And you agreed you thought that there was some connection with what's happening in the Northern Triangle
- and maybe even in the streets here in the United States?
- What are some of the similarities in that?
- Police or government repression of individuals and sort of pushing people into doing things they wouldn't do otherwise.
- How does that work?
- Ron Noblet: I like the question.
- Interesting thing is our government,
- you are not really radicalized
- if you're not a Muslim.
- So exactly the same conditions that turn a person that happens to be a Muslim into a radical,
- into a person full of rage and hatred,
- making one lash out.
- It's the exact same thing that turns a non-Muslim into a gang member
- and makes him full of rage and hate and making want him to lash out.
- But because the money's are only into in a certain area,
- the government says only this is radicalization.
- Therefore, the same, put two guys in a prison cell,
- one is a Muslim,
- one is a Christian.
- They go through the same things,
- they go through the same repressions,
- they grew up the same way.
- They both become radicalized
- in the sense of full of hatred and full of blame
- and willing to go out and do something about it.
- The guy who is a Muslim is considered a radicalized Muslim
- and there’ll be money is going down to deal with that.
- The other is just a gang member get rid of him.
- Or ignore him until he does something.
- You see this taking place to a huge extent in the Triangle.
- In the Northern Triangle,
- which is Guatemala,
- Salvador and Honduras,
- is that the police and the military in those three countries in conjunction with these death squads that make make made up of either police and or army and or rich people who tend to be of lighter skin.
- They count on repression to keep the gang members down.
- And what happens is the number of gang members go up.
- The violence goes up.
- The youth become so radicalized that they become savage.
- And what we see taking place is freaking out the people in the East Coast
- and up in Long Island is just simply a logical extension of what happens when you treat people like in a savage way.
- They become savages.
- It happens everywhere,
- like in LA.
- There was a long hatred between police and gang members.
- A mutual hate.
- Well, we've been working on it for more than a decade now
- in a number of ways.
- So that there is still no love fest,
- but both sides have learned that at least we can work in harmony
- in separate and parallel lines to focus on the violence problem.
- And the tension has gone down.
- And in areas where it has been GRYD outlined we have intervention workers focusing.
- There's less violence towards police.
- As opposed to an area outside where there is no intervention workers.
- The same thing should happen in every city
- or in every area where people learn to work in harmony
- rather than against each other.
- Harmony is usually decided by police
- and it means more often than not “do what we say.
- Give us information that we want and we'll work in harmony.”
- That's not the way it works.
- I think that police should be worked with all the time.
- I do not think that a civilian,
- well, I take it back.
- A civilian should give the police as much information as they can on any anything that takes place.
- I think that's that's righteous.
- That's the way the government is supposed to act.
- But a person who has been an ex-gang member,
- or who is who is an intervention worker,
- if they act like a regular citizen to give the police information
- is to set them up for being killed.
- Which is why we say, do not give the police information.
- Let them do the job so that you can work with guys.
- So that the guys do not retaliate and the whole emphasis of intervention is non-retaliation.
- Try to talk to guys into not seeking revenge.
- With police,
- it is do your job.
- Specifically do it fair and target who you're after.
- Don't throw a blank attack on anyone.
- A problem that we're having in El Salvador
- is the police are reaching the same sort of hatred toward the gang members
- the gang member has for the police.
- So it's war.
- Bradley Thomas Rowe: Right.
- So tell me about here in the states
- there are a few different approaches towards violence reduction
- with gang involved youth.
- So you have taken the Kennedy approach,
- National Network for Safe Communities.
- You’ve got Gary Slutkin in Chicago.
- His Cure Violence model.
- You have LA,
- the LA model over here and sometimes called GRYD by some.
- But tell me about the difference in approaches and how you guys.
- Am I using the right terminology?
- Ron Noblet: Its close.
- Bradley Thomas Rowe: Who is doing what and what seems to be working best?
- Cause I know that you're working with people from across the country.
- And you get exposure to a lot of these different approaches.
- What's working best and what are they called?
- Ron Noblet: I think the simplest way is that the Kennedy model,
- which which was created in Boston,
- is used in New York with Kennedy coming out of the Law school in New York.
- The Kennedy model has an emphasis on police.
- It's basically a carrot and stick approach
- where so called leaders are brought together,
- sat down and told this is what will happen to you if you continue your crime.
- And if you don't continue crime,
- you get all these goodies.
- That's a very simplistic way of putting it.
- There's that model.
- The Slutkin model which comes out of Chicago is broader,
- in that, it basically says that the workers will have nothing
- to do with the police.
- Do not trust the police.
- We will not deal with the police at all.
- And that they are quasi independent groups.
- The Slutkin model does not give very much support to the intervention workers.
- Basically, if you are in trouble on something,
- you're on your own.
- A positive thing about that approach
- is the fact that it uses a public health assessment
- on how people are and how our community is looked at.
- The weaknesses of it was a public.
- Bradley Thomas Rowe: By that you mean like his epidemiological background,
- looking at diseases and how they spread?
- Ron Noblet: Right right.
- The disease would be the violence here.
- The weakness is that gang area or a violent area is not is not a disease area.
- It doesn't, people don't know how to deal with violence.
- Both are models.
- The Kennedy model is good in the sense of if you have an area
- where you have plenty of stick and plenty of carrot
- and you can get the real shot callers,
- you have a chance to put the level of violence down.
- The LA approach consciously does not use the model concept.
- We take what we think is strong with the Kennedy,
- strong with the Slutkin
- and then what we learned in the LA approach
- is that intervention,
- prevention, reentry, targeted policing
- all have to work together in conjunction
- with governmental entities to approach an area
- that is unique in and of itself and do what is effective.
- That's why we resist talking about a model.
- The weakness of the Kennedy model
- is that there's not that many areas that can give a strong carrot.
- So they emphasize the stick,
- number one.
- Number
- two, the real shot callers,
- the real tough guys are not gonna come and sit down and take a bunch of guff from police and be told like this,
- and then we're going to do this to you.
- So probation officers who receive a lot of pressure to go out and grab some guys.
- They get guys who are already on probation,
- already on parole who they have control over already.
- Ok, come and sit in and listen to the police tell you how how tough they’re gonna treat you.
- So it becomes a joke in almost every city that we’ve been in when we talk about that approach.
- There's laughing that takes place
- or this is more set up to get guys shot than it is to help anybody else and that.
- With the Slutkin approach,
- we learn in LA and we preach this that you cannot ignore
- the police or be hostile to the police.
- I mean, they’re there as much as anybody else.
- They know the gang members as well as you do.
- There has to be some sort of mutual respect developed between the intervention community
- and the police community
- so that they work at least in tandem
- to focus on the level of violence.
- That is the LA approach.
- Their strengths and weaknesses with the other two that we don't we don't touch either of them.
- Bradley Thomas Rowe: Interesting.
- Yeah, that's really interesting on how the approach works.
- What are the tools that you use when you.
- What's the triggering event for you guys to get a call?
- What is there?
- Is there a shooting?
- They say hey we got a brother over here and here is the sister,
- here is the parents,
- do you?
- What sort of information to the people that you interact with or that you work with?
- How do they get involved and what's the introduction
- like this guy's credible?
- He's been in the life
- before.
- Like, how does that introduction happen?
- How do the people come together?
- Ron Noblet: Let’s simply put this in three phases.
- In the first phase,
- you work with families.
- You work with the community.
- And you earn their respect by doing favors
- by helping them in any way you can.
- And a lot of emphasis is put on the females,
- the wives,
- the daughters etcetera etcetera.
- The middle level is the crisis mode.
- The crisis is when somebody has been shot and active violence has taken place.
- Calls go up.
- The police get the report.
- Automatically, information goes out to all intervention workers.
- And then those who work in that area are called to it.
- But more often than not,
- the intervention workers will get calls from the community way before
- the police get any kind of calls and can send out that information.
- The third aspect after the crisis is maintenance.
- You have dealt with the crisis.
- You have lowered the crisis heat level.
- But people, especially for the people who have been from the side who have been attacked,
- they have to be worked with consistently so as not to want revenge.
- In the six different areas
- of the six different triggers of violence,
- revenge is the most difficult to deal with.
- It is the hardest to put out and more often than not it has to burn out.
- And so we emphasize to get with the side that has been attacked
- so that the revenge step does not begin and that you keep guys talking.
- The people who are most effective
- at that are ex-gang members.
- And people who have been trained to deal effectively once they have got out of the life.
- We have heavy screening for these guys,
- because in the beginning a lot of them were on both sides.
- We have to get rid of them,
- and they have to be screened out.
- A good way to get rid of them is simply ask the community “What's this guy”
- and the community always knows before anybody else does.
- And so you can ask them those kind of questions.
- In building that in areas like in Central America,
- where gang members are not allowed to even to be in an intervention and to work with a gang member could get you arrested,
- it's literally counterproductive
- in dealing with the problem of violence.
- But the three areas before the crisis,
- crisis,
- after the crisis,
- whatever the terminology they want to use for it,
- requires people who have spent a good deal of time
- in the community working with people and earning their trust.
- Everything is based upon personal relationships
- and trust.
- Everything is based on personal relationships and trust.
- Bradley Thomas Rowe: Okay.
- You guys are working in Central America as well.
- How do you develop that same level of trust
- with a network of people that you can that you can work with to get them to deal with similar situations?
- Ron Noblet: In the last couple of years,
- our team has been brought in by AID
- and creative to focus on two colonias
- and two cities in El Salvador.
- We're not allowed to use ex-gang members
- because of the laws of that country.
- And so the people who have been recruited,
- or given to us to deal with
- (we've been allowed to do some screening out)
- are people who have grown up in these communities,
- but are non-gang members.
- In one community in one..
- Bradley Thomas Rowe: Who are who are these people who are interested in being in this line of work?
- And they're interested and have they been trained?
- Or they just happen to have the network of picking one community?
- Ron Noblet: In one community, I won't give you names,
- but in one of the communities these guys have been working in targeted community for a while.
- Basically like are people who work on ambulances.
- Bradley Thomas Rowe: OK.
- Ron Noblet: Guys who would go to pick up the bodies,
- will take care of people who've been shot.
- Bradley Thomas Rowe: First responders.
- Ron Noblet: First responders.
- All that type of people.
- So they are they have developed a sense of trust in the community.
- So it's just a step to them to deal with the gang members.
- They’re more advanced.
- When we train them, they understand what we're talking about.
- The people in the other community,
- there weren’t anybody like that there.
- And so an organization that we would call a prevention oriented,
- which had a fairly strong infrastructure
- was picked not by us but given to us,
- and we will pick the type of guys we want.
- So we screen them as best we could.
- And then they hire,
- they choose who they are gonna hire.
- And so we're working on them.
- They are behind in the sense
- because they wanted to go out and start doing what an intervention worker does.
- And we said,
- "wait, develop relationships.
- Do little favors for people,
- so we have to hold the ones back to keep them from getting hurt.
- While the others,
- we are able to support more and more.
- The idea of helping people for the sake of helping people
- is usually understood best by people in the religious community.
- We’re starting to train people in religious community
- to do that right now.
- But also trying to get them to say helping people and proselytizing are two separate things.
- And guys might resent your proselytizing
- when you should be just helping.
- So that has to be worked on.
- Bradley Thomas Rowe: Is there a strong group inside
- of the faith based community in Central America
- that want to actually be active and involved in this kind of work?
- Ron Noblet: Yes there is, yes there is.
- And we've been bringing groups of people from El Salvador over here as it is.
- There are six thousand nuns
- in El Salvador and nuns are hardcore.
- so we have been doing everything we can to get the nuns involved in this.
- And many of the pastors.
- There is a very high percentage of charismatic and evangelical
- in El Salvador right now.
- So hopefully a combination of the Catholic Church
- with the evangelicals and the charismatics can really be helpful.
- The difference is that the part of the Catholic Church
- that would be the most effective
- for us got taken out when Romero was assassinated.
- Bradley Thomas Rowe: Oh!
- Ron Noblet: And so the new hierarchy is a little more conservative.
- Bradley Thomas Rowe: Gotcha.
- Ron Noblet: With evangelicals and the charismatics,
- they are hot to go.
- I will give you an example.
- Few weeks ago,
- we had a group of pastors
- over in a training.
- And one of the pastors was very quiet.
- On the second day at lunch,
- he and I were sitting across.
- And he told me that the previous week his son,
- who had just finished med school
- and was ready to start his internship,
- had been playing football.
- We call it soccer.
- With four friends,
- they went to one of the local stores
- before they were going to go home to buy some pops.
- Soft drinks.
- They were outside a store,
- a car came by, it stopped.
- Guy got out,
- two guys got out with automatic weapons
- and just sprayed them all.
- Killed his son,
- killed another guy,
- wounded two and one ran.
- He got the call.
- And he and his wife rushed over there
- and his son had been hit in the head.
- They took him to the hospital.
- The doctor said “no way”.
- So he was dead the next day.
- Turns out,
- the gang had got the word that one of them was snitching.
- And so the gang decided to shoot them all
- to make sure that they got the guy who was a snitch.
- So they killed the snitch
- and they killed his son
- who had done nothing and just wanted to help people.
- He had then said he had told his wife.
- I can't go to LA for this.
- I just can't do it.
- And his wife said maybe you will learn something there that will make sure you can bring back and this won’t happen again.
- That was eleven days before we spoke.
- Nine days before we spoke,
- he buried his son and he came to our training.
- And he said he was glad he had come.
- But that's the dedication of these people.
- Bradley Thomas Rowe: Amazing!
- Thanks for sharing that.
- So this is a public policy group.
- These are students who are learning public policy.
- What can the world of public policy offer to the work that you're doing?
- Whether it's research,
- helping to make sure that laws or institutions are adjusted
- in a certain way,
- bringing some sort of understanding out into the community
- to make this work is easier to do.
- What what can the public policy community do to help you guys?
- Ron Noblet: Everything.
- Everything.
- We have two attorneys at Urban Peace.
- That's their whole job.
- We have a half a dozen other people.
- You focus on policy.
- You change the policies.
- You change what takes place.
- You can help deal and alleviate these problems of violence.
- One of the things they're working on right now is these rules
- where anybody can be put on the gang.
- Bradley Thomas Rowe: Injunction?
- Ron Noblet: Well, a gang injunction is one thing that we will be working on.
- Anybody could be put on gang injunction.
- You and I grew up together and we're brothers.
- You're on the gang.
- If I'm messing with you,
- they can get me.
- Bradley Thomas Rowe: Yeah yeah.
- Ron Noblet: If I'm just talking to you,
- they can get me or put you away.
- That's the injunction.
- Another thing is from field reports.
- Guys, or say this guy is in a gang,
- field goes in, goes into the state gang.
- Bradley Thomas Rowe: Hard to get yourself off of that list.
- Ron Noblet: Yeah, it's almost impossible.
- Bradley Thomas Rowe: Yeah.
- Ron Noblet: We have attorneys working on both.
- All of it has to do with policy.
- The policy of selling crack
- gives you a five times harder judgment than just selling cocaine was well intended.
- But look at the monster it created.
- That policy has to change.
- Your students get them through first.
- And then there's all kinds of policies
- they can work on,
- and I have only become a late believer in the need to change policy.
- Bradley Thomas Rowe: Yeah,
- it's a great comment and it's a great framework to work through.
- Where do you see things going
- for the world of violence reduction,
- gang intervention next five years in the US?
- Let's start there.
- Ron Noblet: That depends a lot on how effective the current administration is.
- It's continuing to divide people,
- terrify people
- and make it easier to hate.
- People who are afraid can be controlled into learning to hate.
- You can't hate someone you're not afraid of.
- So a lot depends on that and how our nation responds to this period of time.
- Bradley Thomas Rowe: I remember.
- What about our white power gangs
- here in across the country
- and the mayhem they're responsible for?
- Ron Noblet: Since nine one one more than seventy percent of the mass killings
- and killings that have taken place in groups killing in the United States
- have been done by white power guys.
- But you never hear that.
- You never hear everybody talking about it.
- I see them getting increasingly stronger.
- They're driven.
- Well, there's two kinds of white power
- that I have seen.
- There's one that is basically anti-black,
- anti-brown anti anti anti based upon fear.
- There's another,
- that's more based upon real white pride
- and they're trying to say white power,
- just like black power was an attempt to say we are somebody.
- So those are different.
- And I don't think they should be approached
- in the same way that the more virulent type of white power.
- Because there's white pride and there’s white power.
- The white power people talk about white pride,
- but they're more anti.
- The white pride people are trying to get themselves together.
- And what are we,
- because they've never had to face the idea of white as a group
- or white as a tribe.
- It's just us and then people are talking.
- And all of a sudden there is Oh yeah!
- I am white.
- Oh yeah!
- well, what does it mean to be white?
- Bradley Thomas Rowe: Right.
- Ron Noblet: First time I brought it up,
- and I was doing some training at a local college
- and so this was in the late seventies or in the eighties.
- And when I was talking about Asians
- as one thing to this group of teachers.
- Talking about blacks,
- talking about brown everything was cool.
- When I started talking about whites,
- the teachers went crazy.
- Why do you have to talk about that?
- Why do you have to bring up all that cultural stuff for?
- We don't have a culture.
- The white culture is so dominant.
- How can you see yourself in the mirror?
- Look, how hostile you are!
- And then oh, my God!
- That's what I got to deal with.
- And that's what the country is dealing with right now.
- You have people who are for the first time having question their whiteness.
- I mean it was only about five years ago somebody said,
- Ron you are a you have white,
- was it not white?
- A sense of yeah white entitlement.
- What's that mean?
- What is white entitlement?
- And I had no idea.
- And then guy started.
- Have you always been this or has been that?
- I said oh yeah I thought that will put me ahead because I was smart.
- All right.
- And I realized yeah, because I gotta white puss.
- I got a lot of stuff and I got that white.
- It’s not white entitlement so much as white privilege.
- Bradley Thomas Rowe: White privilege.
- Yes.
- Ron Noblet: White privilege and I said okay.
- Bradley Thomas Rowe: Yeah absolutely!
- Ron Noblet: Now that I know what it is I will use it more effectively.
- Bradley Thomas Rowe: Well, I think you are hitting,
- I think you are hitting on a really good point which
- is, it's hard to see obstacles that are not there.
- So white privilege comes from doors opening
- that you didn't see open for you.
- Ron Noblet: Yeah, least expected.
- Bradley Thomas Rowe: But there are other people who didn't have that door opened.
- And so they see that you are able to walk through it.
- Ron Noblet: Exactly.
- Bradley Thomas Rowe: And so I think it requires communication and a perspective to happen.
- But your point of the radicalized Muslim is a terrorist.
- The radicalized white guy is not called a terrorist.
- Ron Noblet: Just an angry white guy.
- Bradley Thomas Rowe: Just an angry white guy right.
- And same thing with gangs right?
- So young black man who is involved in a clique group
- and angry and doing some different things.
- Well, that's a gang member.
- But people don't say the same thing
- about the white equivalent to that person.
- Ron Noblet: Exactly.
- A guy doesn't join a gang because he wants to do violent things or criminal things.
- He joins a gang because it offers something that he's not getting.
- Bradley Thomas Rowe: Right right.
- Safety, protection, community.
- Ron Noblet: Love.
- Bradley Thomas Rowe:
- Love.
- Wow!
- So we are in California, right?
- We're a bordering state to Mexico.
- What do you think we need to do either in Los Angeles,
- or maybe it's with our state kind of,
- with the immigration situation?
- Is our current immigration policy,
- the deportations,
- the criminalization of illegal entry?
- How is that affecting radicalization of youth or of indoctrination into gangs?
- Or is the difficulty of passage the expensive passage?
- Does that simply cause people to pay more
- and to get the tougher dudes
- to get through and across and more bigger,
- stronger, more entrenched,
- protected networks to get through?
- How do the dynamics change
- when we start to sort of create a tougher,
- more punitive border?
- If you have any ideason that.
- Ron Noblet: Got a couple.
- Starting from the beginning.
- There is no policy.
- There is no policy one way or another,
- that’s number one.
- Number two, people
- are coming up from Central America right now
- because they're scared.
- This is the only choices you have when you're in those when you’re in the triangle of Guatemala,
- Honduras, El Salvador.
- Join a gang,
- get murdered,
- run
- or become an addict.
- There is no other choice.
- People don't want to die.
- There are no jobs.
- The way life is rough and it is abusive.
- The governments do not protect them.
- They have to protect themselves.
- You either run or you die.
- The trail from Central America through Mexico
- to the US border is a trail of violence imposed upon them.
- Women when they reach the Guatemalan border,
- getting ready to go into Mexico
- are already buying stuff knowing
- or providing themselves
- with things knowing that they're going to be raped
- on the trail.
- But they still want to get to the United States.
- They want to get to the United States
- because that's the only chance they have to live.
- The Mexicans going across are now.
- There is a net outflow from the United States into Mexico.
- The Mexicans are not the ones who wanted to come across here.
- It's the Central Americans to save their own lives.
- The gang members basically
- prey upon the people who are coming up
- and they don't necessarily protect them or help them across.
- They prey upon them.
- The coyotes are separate separate types of gangs.
- These in Maine are guys who come from generations of smugglers.
- They already have their routes.
- The Sinaloa Cartel,
- all the cartels that come out of Sinaloa
- they have been smugglers for two hundred years.
- For them,
- it's a product.
- Product whether it's people,
- marijuana,
- cattle,
- goats.
- You name it.
- Cocaine, heroin.
- Many of the routes now that have been historically run by coyotes
- to bring people in within the United States
- have now been taken over by cartels.
- But they don't necessarily go together.
- In the Maine,
- its people who are coming up.
- Bradley Thomas Rowe: By taking over you mean you have to pay tax.
- You have to pay for protection to get through or they're actually running?
- Ron Noblet: They are running it now.
- Bradley Thomas Rowe: They’re running it?
- Okay.
- Ron Noblet: They’re running it.
- The people who pay coyotes to come across that's one thing.
- But people in the Maine are just everything is taken from them
- or stolen from them on the way up.
- And that is just they’re preyed upon by gangs.
- It is more like wolves preying upon moving herds.
- There has been some excellent writing
- done on taking that train up here.
- Bradley Thomas Rowe: La Bestia?
- Ron Noblet: Yeah and its powerful, its powerful.
- Bradley Thomas Rowe: One of the things you had shared with me
- ways back was with regards to this idea of human trafficking and slavery.
- Is it in plain sight here in LA?
- Are we?
- Ron Noblet: Yes.
- Bradley Thomas Rowe: Ok.
- And how do we, how do we address that?
- Ron Noblet: I wouldn't.
- I wouldn't use an innocuous term that bureaucrats use like human trafficking.
- I would say flat out slavery,
- number one.
- Cause most people what they don't want to see things.
- And so they give it little wimpy names,
- how the bureaucrats give wimpy names.
- But you have you have slavery,
- human slavery in any field that requires intense labor taking place right now.
- Chinese, Cambodians
- are heavy,
- heavy groups of slaves working in what looks like an innocuous apartment house.
- There might be a hundred,
- hundred fifty people
- in there who are basically slaves.
- The sex slavery is in different arenas.
- Most of the people now who are being trafficked are in the greater LA
- and across the country are African Americans
- being trafficked by gangs.
- By their own gang members.
- But they're also people
- who are brought up through Tijuana
- that I have seen where the women are broken in Tijuana.
- Brought from someplace else,
- broken in Tijuana,
- then brought across here as sex slaves.
- Bradley Thomas Rowe: What does that mean to be broken into?
- Ron Noblet: They're broken so they are compliant.
- They’re physically,
- emotionally broken and they have guys who do just whose job it is to break them,
- so that they'll be more compliant,
- easier to control.
- And more and more gangs are going and groups are going into the human slavery
- and the sexual trafficking,
- basically because you can use a woman
- over and over and over again and just her value goes down.
- When they can't be used anymore,
- you just get rid of them and that's how they deal with it.
- Bradley Thomas Rowe: So that's the difference between a commodity
- and something that continues to generate.
- Ron Noblet: Yeah.
- Single use commodities and with and with the women
- multiple used commodities.
- And I separate the sexual aspect of it
- from the workers aspect of it.
- Bradley Thomas Rowe: What are some of the areas
- that if these students are looking for opportunities for work,
- for areas where they can make an impact or they can make a difference?
- Where should a UCLA or graduate from another school go?
- Ron Noblet: I would say be honest with yourself.
- Are you looking for money?
- Are you looking for recognition?
- Or are you looking to help people?
- If you're looking for money and or recognition,
- go work with the government of one sort or another.
- Go become professional social work type of person.
- If you’re looking for recognition,
- go join, get involved with a foundation.
- If you want to help people,
- learn to not be afraid of violence per se.
- But it requires an internal look
- and an internal acceptance
- that few people are willing to face
- on their own and often only face under challenging conditions.
- My recommendation
- is look inside and be honest with yourself.
- Bradley Thomas Rowe: Awesome!
- Thanks Ron.
- Ron Noblet: Thank you.
- Bradley Thomas Rowe: Appreciate it.
- Ron Noblet: I want more coffee.